blog: Calling Python script from Node-RED (#2210)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/06/calling-python-script-from-node-red.md

---

> title: Calling Python script from Node-RED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Calling a Python script from Node-RED
```

> subtitle: Guite on how to execute Python scripts from Node-RED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtitle: Guide on how to execute Python scripts from Node-RED
```

> description: Learn How to seamlessly execute python script from Node-RED.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to seamlessly execute python script from Node-RED.
```

date: 2024-06-21
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: 
tags:
   - post
   - node-red
   - how-to
   - python
---

> Have you ever needed to execute Python scripts from Node-RED? If so, this comprehensive guide is for you. We will walk you through the process of integrating Python seamlessly with Node-RED, alongside troubleshooting tips and techniques for passing arguments to scripts.

Reviewer: Again add what python enables you to do in this intro section

<!--more-->

> ## Why people use python with Node-RED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why use python with Node-RED
```

Node-RED is a powerful visual programming tool used for building IoT applications. It is built on Node.js, which meets IoT application needs with its asynchronous operations and event-driven, non-blocking architecture. Javascript on which Node.js is built and the Node-RED supports can handle a wide range of tasks, However, Python excels in specific areas such as complex computations and machine learning due to its extensive set of libraries.

Many users choose to integrate Python with Node-RED to leverage these strengths. By using Node-RED and Python together,  developers can create advanced IoT solutions that excel in computational tasks and analysis effectively.

> 

Reviewer: We need a better explanation on why python. Start with a general introduction and then relate it to typically node-red use cases.

## Installing Python

> When executing Python scripts, it's essential to have the Python runtime installed on your system. However, if you've installed Node-RED using npm, Python is typically have already installed on your system. This is because Python is a prerequisite for npm to build native modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When executing Python scripts, it's essential to have the Python runtime installed on your system. As Python is a prerequisite for installing Node-RED npm, you might have it already installed in your system. 
```

Author: No, it will not work in the ff cloud, https://github.com/FlowFuse/customer/issues/206#issuecomment-2083631535, but will work with the ff device agent.

Author: updated this suggestion for more clarity

To verify if Python is installed, open your terminal and execute:

```bash
python --version
```

!["Screenshot of terminal showing the python version installed, conforming it is installed"](./images/calling-python-script-from-node-red-py-conformation.png "Screenshot of terminal showing the python version installed, conforming it is installed"){data-zoomable}

The above command displays the version of Python installed on your system as shown in the above image. If the above command doesn't work, try:

```bash
python3 --version
```

The specific command to use depends on how Python was installed and configured on your system. However, make sure to use `python <filename>.py` if the first command works, or `python3 <filename>.py` if the second command works, while executing Python scripts.

## Executing Python Script from Node-RED

> Let's learn how to call a Python script from Node-RED. First, we'll create a basic script file that contains a function to print text in the console based on input. Currently, the function uses hardcoded input. To create this file using Node-RED, import the following flow, deploy it and press the inject button:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's now see how to call a Python script from Node-RED. First, we'll create a basic script file that contains a function to print text in the console based on input. Currently, the function uses hardcoded input. To create this file using Node-RED, import the following flow, deploy it and press the inject button:
```

{% endrenderFlow %}

Now, when you deploy this flow and click on the inject node to execute the file, you should see the text 'Positive number entered' and `{ code: 0 }`, which indicates your script has been successfully executed.

## Reading Temperature Sensor using Python script

> Now that we've covered how to execute a Python script from Node-RED with a simple example, let's dive into a more practical demonstration where we read sensor data using Python. While Node-RED has a wide range of community nodes that allow reading different sensors, for better demonstration this example is great so we will use Python for this purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having explored how to run a Python script within Node-RED, let's move from theory to practice with a real-world example. We'll demonstrate how to read sensor data using Python, even though Node-RED itself offers numerous community-built nodes for this purpose. This approach offers deeper insights into integrating external scripts, showcasing the flexibility of Node-RED for custom solutions.
```

Author: the above example is also practical, so need to remove theory word

> Before proceeding, ensure that Node-RED is running on a device connected to a temperature sensor. For detailed instructions, refer to [Setting Up Node-RED on Different Hardware](/node-red/hardware/), In my case, I am running Node-RED on a Raspberry Pi 5 with a DHT11 sensor connected to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, ensure that Node-RED is running on a device connected to a temperature sensor. For detailed instructions, refer to [Setting Up Node-RED on Different Hardware](/node-red/hardware/), In this case, we ae running Node-RED on a Raspberry Pi 5 with a DHT11 sensor connected to it.
```

1. Drag an Inject node onto the canvas, and set repeat to 1 seconds of interval.
2. Drag an Exec node and set the path to `python <filename>.py`, replace the filename with the name of the file which reads the sensor data, make sure the python file doesn't contain the loop.
3. Drag the JSON node onto the canvas and set the action to "Always convert to JSON object".
4. Drag the Debug node onto the canvas.
5. Connect the output of the Inject node to the input of the Exec node and output of the Exec node to the input of the JSON node, and finally the JSON node's output to the input of the Debug node.

> I have given the complete flow which creates the Python file to read the DHT11 sensor and executes that file after 1 second of interval. After deploying the flow you should able to see the sensor data on the debug sidebar as shown in the below image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the complete flow which creates the Python file to read the DHT11 sensor and executes that file after 1 second of interval. After deploying the flow you should able to see the sensor data on the debug sidebar as shown in the below image.
```

---
title: Calling a Python script from Node-RED
subtitle: Guide on how to execute Python scripts from Node-RED
description: Learn how to seamlessly execute a Python script from Node-RED for advanced data processing and analysis.

> date: 2024-06-25

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2024-07-02
```

authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: /blog/2024/06/images/calling-python-script-from-node-red.png
tags:
   - post
   - node-red
   - how-to
   - python
---

> Python's robust data processing capabilities and extensive libraries are well-known in programming. When combined with Node-RED, these technologies can synergize to elevate data analytics and automation to new heights.
> 
> This guide walks you through integrating Python scripts with Node-RED. You'll gain practical insights, troubleshooting tips, and effective techniques for executing scripts, enabling you to leverage this powerful combination for your IoT projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python's robust data processing capabilities and extensive libraries are well-known in programming. When combined with Node-RED, these technologies can synergize to elevate data analytics and automation.
This guide walks you through integrating Python scripts with Node-RED. You'll gain practical insights, troubleshooting tips, and effective techniques for executing scripts, enabling you to leverage this powerful combination for your IoT projects.
```

> This guide walks you through seamlessly integrating Python scripts with Node-RED. You'll gain practical insights, troubleshooting tips, and effective techniques for executing scripts, enabling you to leverage this powerful combination for your IoT projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide walks you through integrating Python scripts with Node-RED. You'll gain practical insights, troubleshooting tips, and effective techniques for executing scripts, enabling you to leverage this powerful combination for your IoT projects.
```

<!--more-->

## Why use python with Node-RED

Integrating Python and Node-RED can significantly enhance your IoT and automation initiatives by leveraging their distinct strengths. Node-RED excels in creating easy workflows, efficiently processing data streams, and integrating hardware, APIs, and. Meanwhile, Python offers a rich set of libraries for advanced tasks such as machine learning and AI, pivotal in realizing Industry 4.0 concepts.

This combination allows developers to build robust and flexible solutions. For instance, while Node-RED manages data flow and device communication, Python can perform complex analytics, and predictive modeling, or integrate with AI frameworks. This integration bridges the gap between data collection and actionable insights, enabling systems to make informed decisions autonomously.

## Installing Python

> When executing Python scripts, it's essential to have the Python runtime installed on your system. Since Python is a prerequisite for npm, you might already have it installed if you installed Node-RED via npm 

Reviewer 2: What do you mean, might. If it's a dependency, it's there?

```suggestion
When executing Python scripts, it's essential to have the Python runtime installed on your system. Since Python is a prerequisite for npm, you might already have it installed if you installed Node-RED via npm.
```

Author: I mean, if users are already running the node-red, that means they have Python because npm requires to be installed py for building native modules and the npm is the only way to install NR: https://github.com/FlowFuse/customer/issues/206#issuecomment-2083631535**

To verify if Python is installed, open your terminal and execute:

```bash
python --version
```

!["Screenshot of terminal showing the python version installed, conforming it is installed"](./images/calling-python-script-from-node-red-py-conformation.png "Screenshot of terminal showing the python version installed, conforming it is installed"){data-zoomable}

The above command displays the version of Python installed on your system as shown in the above image. If the above command doesn't work, try:

```bash
python3 --version
```

> The specific command to use depends on how Python was installed and configured on your system. However, make sure to use `python <filename>.py` if the first command works, or `python3 <filename>.py` if the second command works, while executing Python scripts.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK there's a symlink from `python` in the $PATH from `python3`. And so these are the same executable these days.

Author: Yes, in my Windows environment, `python` works, whereas in the Ubuntu VM, I have to use `python3`. This might be because I followed incorrect instructions during the installation in the VM, but keeping this section can help readers if they had done the same before.
